Sir Hugh, persuade me not;
I will make a Star-chamber matter of it:
if he were twenty Sir John Falstaffs,
he shall not abuse Robert Shallow, esquire.
In the county of Gloucester,
justice of peace and 'Coram.'
Ay, cousin Slender, and 'Custalourum.
Ay, and 'Rato-lorum' too;
and a gentleman born,
master parson; who writes himself 'Armigero,'
in any bill, warrant, quittance, or obligation,
'Armigero.'
Ay, that I do;
and hath done any time these three hundred years.
All his successors gone before him hath done't;
and all his ancestors that come after him may:
they may give the dozen white luces in their coat.
It is an old coat.
Py'r lady;
If Sir John Falstaff have committed
disparagements unto you,
I am of the church,
and will be glad to do my benevolence
to make atonements and compremises between you.
Ha! o' my life, if I were young again,
the sword should end it.
It is petter that friends is the sword, and end it:
and there is also another device in my prain,
which peradventure prings goot discretions with it:
there is Anne Page,
which is daughter to Master George Page,
which is pretty virginity.
Mistress Anne Page?
She has brown hair,
and speaks small like a woman.
It is that fery person for all the orld,
as just as you will desire;
and seven hundred pounds of moneys,
and gold and silver,
is her grandsire upon his death's-bed--
Got deliver to a joyful resurrections!
--give, when she is able
to overtake seventeen years old:
it were a goot motion if we leave our pribbles
and prabbles,
and desire a marriage between Master Abraham
and Mistress Anne Page.
Did her grandsire leave her seven hundred pound?
Ay, and her father is make her a petter penny.
I know the young gentlewoman;
she has good gifts.
Seven hundred pounds and possibilities is goot gifts.
Well, let us see honest Master Page.
Is Falstaff there?
Shall I tell you a lie?
I do despise a liar
as I do despise one that is false,
or as I despise one that is not true.
The knight, Sir John, is there;
and, I beseech you,
be ruled by your well-willers.
I will peat the door for Master Page.
What, hoa! Got pless your house here!
Who's there?
Here is Got's plessing, and your friend,
and Justice Shallow;
and here young Master Slender,
that peradventures shall tell you another tale,
if matters grow to your likings.
I am glad to see your worships well.
I thank you for my venison, Master Shallow.
Master Page, I am glad to see you:
much good do it your good heart!
I wished your venison better;
it was ill killed.
How doth good Mistress Page?
--and I thank you always with my heart, la! with my heart.
Sir, I thank you.
Sir, I thank you; by yea and no, I do.
I am glad to see you, good Master Slender.
How does your fallow greyhound, sir?
I heard say he was outrun on Cotsall.
It could not be judged, sir.
You'll not confess, you'll not confess.
That he will not. 'Tis your fault,
'tis your fault; 'tis a good dog.
A cur, sir.
(laughing)
Sir, he's a good dog, and a fair dog:
can there be more said? he is good and fair.
Is Sir John Falstaff here?
Sir, he is within;
and I would I could do a good office between you.
It is spoke as a Christians ought to speak.
He hath wronged me, Master Page.
Sir, he doth in some sort confess it.
If it be confessed, it is not redress'd:
is not that so, Master Page?
He hath wronged me; indeed he hath,
at a word, he hath, believe me:
Robert Shallow, esquire, saith, he is wronged.
Here comes Sir John.
Now, Master Shallow, you'll complain of me to the king?
Knight, you have beaten my men,
killed my deer, and broke open my lodge.
But not kissed your keeper's daughter?
Tut, a pin! this shall be answered.
I will answer it straight; I have done all this.
That is now answered.
The council shall know this.
'Twere better for you if it were known in counsel:
you'll be laughed at.
Pauca verba, Sir John; goot worts.
Good worts! good cabbage.
Slender, I broke your head:
what matter have you against me?
Marry, sir, I have matter in my head against you;
and against your cony-catching rascals,
Bardolph, Nym, and Pistol.
They carried me to the tavern,
made me drunk, and afterward picked my pocket!
You Banbury cheese!
Ay, it is no matter.
How now, Mephostophilus!
Slice, I say! pauca, pauca: slice!
that's my humour.
Where's Simple, my man? Can you tell, cousin?
I pray you, peace. Now let us understand.
There is three umpires in this matter,
as I understand;
that is, Master Page, fidelicet Master Page;
and there is myself, fidelicet myself;
and the three party is,
lastly and finally,
mine host of the Garter.
We three, to hear it and end it between them.
Fery goot:
I will make a prief of it in my note-book;
and afterwords we will work upon the cause
with as great discreetly as we can.
Pistol!
He hears with ears.
The tevil and his tam! what phrase is this,
'He hears with ear'? why, it is affectations.
Pistol, did you pick Master Slender's purse?
Ay, by these gloves, did he,
or I would I might never come
in mine own great chamber again else,
of seven groats in mill-sixpences,
and two Edward shovel-boards, of Yead Miller
that cost me two shilling and two pence apiece
of Yead Miller, by these gloves.
Is this true, Pistol?
No; it is false, if it is a pick-purse.
Ha, thou mountain-foreigner! Sir John and Master mine,
I combat challenge of this latten bilbo.
Word of denial in thy labras here!
Word of denial: froth and scum, thou liest!
By these gloves, then, 'twas he.
Be avised, sir, and pass good humours:
I will say 'marry trap' with you,
if you run the nuthook's humour on me;
that is the very note of it.
By this hat, then, he in the red face had it;
for though I cannot remember
what I did when you made me drunk,
yet I am not altogether an ass.
What say you, Scarlet and John?
Why, sir, for my part
I say the gentleman had drunk himself
out of his five sentences.
It is his five senses: fie, what the ignorance is!
And being fap, sir, was, as they say,
cashiered; and so conclusions passed the careires.
Ay, you spake in Latin then too;
but 'tis no matter:
I'll ne'er be drunk whilst I live again,
but in honest, civil, godly company, for this trick:
if I be drunk,
I'll be drunk with those that have
the fear of God, and not with drunken knaves.
So Got udge me, that is a virtuous mind.
You hear all these matters denied, gentlemen;
you hear it.
Nay, daughter, carry the wine in;
we'll drink within.
O heaven! this is Mistress Anne Page.
How now, Mistress Ford!
Mistress Ford, by my troth, you are very well met:
by your leave, good mistress.
My husband's name is Ford, sir.
Well I shall desire
more acquaintance of you.
The like of you, good Mistress Page.
With all my heart, Sir John.
Come, husband, you go? Dinner stays for us.
Wife, bid these gentlemen welcome.
Come, we have a hot venison pasty to dinner:
come, gentlemen, I hope we shall drink down
all unkindness.
I had rather than forty shillings
I had my Book of Songs and Sonnets here.
How now, Simple! where have you been?
I must wait on myself, now must I?
You have not the Book of Riddles
about you, have you?
Book of Riddles! why, did you not lend it
to Alice Shortcake upon All-hallowmas last,
a fortnight afore Michaelmas?
Come, coz; come, coz; we stay for you.
A word with you, coz;
marry, this, coz: there is, as 'twere,
a tender, a kind of tender,
made afar off by Sir Hugh here.
Do you understand me?
Ay, sir, you shall find me reasonable;
if it be so, I shall do that that is reason.
Nay, but understand me.
So I do, sir.
Give ear to his motions, Master Slender:
I will description the matter to you,
if you be capacity of it.
Nay, I will do as my cousin Shallow says:
I pray you, pardon me sir;
he's a justice of peace in his country,
simple though I stand here.
But that is not the question:
the question is concerning your marriage.
Ay, there's the point, sir.
Marry, is it; the very point of it;
to Mistress Anne Page.
Cousin Abraham Slender, can you love her?
Can you, carry her, your desires towards her?
I hope, sir,
I will do
as it shall become one that would do reason.
Nay, conceive me, conceive me, sweet coz:
what I do is to pleasure you, coz.
Can you love the maid?
I will marry her, sir, at your request:
but if there be no great love in the beginning,
yet heaven may decrease it
upon better acquaintance,
when we are married and have more occasion
to know one another;
I hope, upon familiarity will grow more contempt:
but if you say, 'Marry her,' I will marry her;
that I am freely dissolved, and dissolutely.
It is a fery discretion answer;
save the fall is in the word 'dissolutely:'
the word is, according to our meaning,
'resolutely:' his meaning is good.
Ay, I think my cousin meant well.
Ay, or else I would I might be hanged, la!
Here comes fair Mistress Anne.
Mistress Anne! Would I were young for your sake.
The dinner is on the table;
my father desires your worships' company.
I will wait on him, fair Mistress Anne.
Od's plessed will!
I will not be absence at the grace.
Will't please your worship to come in, sir?
No, I thank you, forsooth, heartily;
I am very well.
The dinner attends you, sir.
I am not a-hungry, I thank you, forsooth.
Go, sirrah, for all you are my man,
go wait upon my cousin Shallow.
A justice of peace sometimes may be beholding
to his friend for a man.
I keep but three men and a boy yet,
till my mother be dead: but what though?
Yet I live like a poor gentleman born.
I may not go in without your worship:
they will not sit till you come.
I' faith, I'll eat nothing;
I thank you as much as though I did.
I pray you, sir, walk in.
I had rather walk here, I thank you.
I bruised my shin th' other day with playing
at sword and dagger with a master of fence;
three veneys for a dish of stewed prunes;
and, by my troth, I cannot abide the smell of hot meat since.
Why do your dogs bark so? be there bears i' the town?
I think there are, sir; I heard them talked of.
I love the sport well
but I shall as soon quarrel
at it as any man in England.
You are afraid, if you see the bear loose,
are you not?
Ay, indeed, sir.
That's meat and drink to me, now.
I have seen Sackerson loose twenty times,
and have taken him by the chain;
but, I warrant you,
the women have so cried and shrieked at it,
that it passed:
but women, indeed, cannot abide 'em;
they are very ill-favored rough things.
Come, gentle Master Slender, come; we stay for you.
I'll eat nothing, I thank you, sir.
By cock and pie, you shall not choose, sir!
come, come.
Nay, pray you, lead the way.
Come on, sir.
Mistress Anne, yourself shall go first.
Not I, sir; pray you, keep on.
No, I will not. I will not go first.
Truly, indeed, I will not do you that wrong.
I pray you sir!
I'll rather be unmannerly than troublesome.
You do yourself wrong, indeed you do!
Go your ways, and ask of Doctor Caius' house
which is the way:
and there dwells one Mistress Quickly,
which is in the manner of his nurse,
or his dry nurse, or his cook,
or his laundry, his washer, and his wringer.
Well, sir.
Nay, it is petter yet.
Give her this letter;
for it is a 'oman that altogether's acquaintance
with Mistress Anne Page:
and the letter is, to desire
and require her to solicit your master's desires
to Mistress Anne.
I pray you, be gone:
I will make an end of my dinner;
there's pippins and cheese to come.
Mine host of the Garter!
What says my bully-rook?
speak scholarly and wisely.
Truly, good mine host, I must turn away
some of my followers.
Discard, bully Hercules; cashier:
let them wag; trot, trot.
I sit at ten pounds a week.
Thou'rt an emperor, Caesar, Keisar, and Pheezar.
I will entertain Bardolph;
he shall draw, he shall tap:
said I well, bully Hector?
Do so, good mine host.
I have spoke; let him follow.
Let me see thee froth and lime:
I am at a word; follow.
Bardolph, follow him.
A tapster is a good trade:
an old cloak makes a new jerkin;
a withered serving-man a fresh tapster.
Go; adieu.
It is a life that I have desired:
I will thrive.
O base Hungarian wight!
Wilt thou the spigot wield?
He was gotten in drink:
is not the humour conceited?
I am glad I am so acquit of this tinderbox:
his thefts were too open;
his filching was like an unskilful singer;
he kept not time.
The good humour is to steal at a minute's rest.
'Convey,' the wise it call.
'Steal!' foh! a fico for the phrase!
Well, sirs, I am almost out at heels.
Why, then, let kibes ensue.
There is no remedy; I must cony-catch;
I must shift.
Young ravens must have food.
Which of you know Ford of this town?
I ken the wight: he is of substance good.
My honest lads,
I will tell you what I am about.
Two yards, and more.
No quips now, Pistol!
Indeed, I am in the waist two yards about;
but I am now about no waste;
I am about thrift.
Briefly, I do mean
to make love to Ford's wife:
I spy entertainment in her;
she discourses, she carves,
she gives the leer of invitation:
I can construe the action
of her familiar style;
and the hardest voice of her behavior,
to be Englished rightly, is,
'I am Sir John Falstaff's.'
He hath studied her will,
and translated her will,
out of honesty into English.
The anchor is deep: will that humour pass?
Now, the report goes
she has all the rule of her husband's purse:
he hath a legion of angels.
As many devils entertain;
and 'To her, boy,' say I.
The humour rises; humour me the angels.
I have writ me here a letter to her:
and here another to Page's wife,
who even now gave me good eyes too,
examined my parts
with most judicious oeillades;
sometimes the beam of her view gilded my foot,
sometimes my portly belly.
Then did the sun on dunghill shine.
I thank thee for that humour.
O, she did so course o'er my exteriors
with such a greedy intention,
that the appetite of her eye did seem to
scorch me up like a burning-glass!
she bears the purse too;
she is a region in Guiana,
all gold and bounty.
I will be cheater to them both,
and they shall be exchequers to me;
they shall be my East and West Indies,
and I will trade to them both.
Go bear thou this letter to Mistress Page;
and thou this to Mistress Ford:
we will thrive, lads, we will thrive.
Shall I Sir Pandarus of Troy become,
And by my side wear steel?
then, Lucifer take all!
I will run no base humour:
here, take the humour-letter:
I will keep the havior of reputation.
Hold, sirrah,
bear you these letters tightly;
Sail like my pinnace to these golden shores.
Rogues, hence, avaunt!
vanish like hailstones, go;
Trudge, plod away o' the hoof;
seek shelter, pack!
Falstaff will learn the humour of the age,
French thrift, you rogues; myself and skirted page.
Let vultures gripe thy guts!
for gourd and fullam holds,
And high and low beguiles the rich and poor:
Tester I'll have in pouch when thou shalt lack,
Base Phrygian Turk!
I have operations which be humours of revenge.
Wilt thou revenge?
By welkin and her star!
With wit or steel?
With both the humours, I:
I will disclose the humour
of this love to Page.
And I to Ford shall eke unfold
How Falstaff, varlet vile,
His dove will prove, his gold will hold,
And his soft couch defile.
My humour shall not cool:
I will incense Page to deal with poison;
I will possess him with yellowness,
for the revolt of mine is dangerous:
that is my true humour.
Thou art the Mars of malecontents:
I second thee; troop on.
What, John Rugby! John? John, I say!
I pray thee, go to the casement,
and see if you can see my master,
Master Doctor Caius, coming.
If he do, i' faith,
and find any body in the house,
here will be an old abusing
of God's patience
and the king's English.
I'll go watch.
Go; and we'll have a posset
for't soon at night,
in faith, at the latter end
of a sea-coal fire.
An honest, willing, kind fellow,
as ever servant shall come in house withal,
and, I warrant you, no tell-tale
nor no breed-bate:
his worst fault is,
that he is given to prayer;
he is something peevish that way:
but nobody but has his fault;
but let that pass.
Peter Simple, you say your name is?
Ay, for fault of a better.
And Master Slender's your master?
Ay, forsooth.
Does he not wear a great round beard,
like a glover's paring-knife?
No, forsooth:
he hath but a little wee face,
with a little yellow beard,
a Cain-coloured beard.
A softly-sprighted man, is he not?
Ay, forsooth: but he is as tall a man
of his hands as any is
between this and his head;
he hath fought with a warrener.
How say you? O, I should remember him:
does he not hold up his head, as it were,
and strut in his gait?
Yes, indeed, does he.
Well, heaven send Anne Page no worse fortune!
Tell Master Parson Evans I will do what I can
for your master:
Anne is a good girl, and I wish--
Out, alas! here comes my master.
We shall all be shent.
Run in here, good young man;
go into this closet: he will not stay long.
What, John Rugby! John! what, John, I say!
Go, John, go inquire for my master;
I doubt he be not well, that he comes not home.
(Singing)
Vat is you sing? I do not like des toys.
Pray you, go and vetch me in my closet
un boitier vert, a box, a green-a box:
do intend vat I speak? a green-a box.
Ay, forsooth; I'll fetch it you.
I am glad he went not in himself:
if he had found the young man,
he would have been horn-mad.
Fe, fe, fe, fe! ma foi,
il fait fort chaud.
Je m'en vais a la cour--la grande affaire.
Is it this, sir?
Oui; mette le au mon pocket: depeche, quickly.
Vere is dat knave Rugby?
What, John Rugby! John!
Here, sir!
You are John Rugby, and you are Jack Rugby.
Come, take-a your rapier,
and come after my heel to the court.
'Tis ready, sir, here in the porch.
By my trot, I tarry too long. Od's me!
Qu'ai-j'oublie!
dere is some simples in my closet,
dat I vill not for the varld
I shall leave behind.
Ay me, he'll find the young man here,
and be mad!
O diable, diable! vat is in my closet?
Villain! larron!
Rugby, my rapier!
Good master, be content.
Wherefore shall I be content-a?
The young man is an honest man.
What shall de honest man do in my closet?
dere is no honest man
dat shall come in my closet.
I beseech you, be not so phlegmatic.
Hear the truth of it:
he came of an errand to me
from Parson Hugh.
Vell.
to desire her to--
Peace-a your tongue.
Speak-a your tale.
To desire this honest gentlewoman, your maid,
to speak a good word to Mistress Anne Page
for my master in the way of marriage.
This is all, indeed, la!
but I'll ne'er put my finger in the fire,
and need not.
Sir Hugh send-a you? Rugby, baille me some paper.
Tarry you a little-a while.
I am glad he is so quiet:
if he had been thoroughly moved,
you should have heard him
so loud and so melancholy.
But notwithstanding, man,
I'll do you your master what good I can:
and the very yea and the no is,
the French doctor, my master,
--I may call him my master, look you,
for I keep his house;
and I wash, wring, brew, bake,
scour, dress meat and drink,
make the beds and do all myself,--
'Tis a great charge to come under one body's hand.
Are you avised o' that?
you shall find it a great charge:
and to be up early and down late;
but notwithstanding,
--to tell you in your ear;
I would have no words of it,
--my master himself is in love
with Mistress Anne Page:
but notwithstanding that,
I know Anne's mind,--
that's neither here nor there.
You jack'nape,
give-a this letter to Sir Hugh;
by gar, it is a shallenge:
I will cut his troat in dee park;
and I will teach
a scurvy jack-a-nape priest
to meddle or make.
You may be gone;
it is not good you tarry here.
By gar, I will cut all his two stones;
he shall not have a stone to throw at his dog:
Alas, he speaks but for his friend.
It is no matter-a ver dat:
do not you tell-a me
dat I shall have Anne Page for myself?
By gar, I vill kill de Jack priest;
and I have appointed mine host of de Jarteer
to measure our weapon.
By gar, I will myself have Anne Page.
Sir, the maid loves you,
and all shall be well.
We must give folks leave to prate:
what, the good-jer!
Rugby, come to the court with me.
By gar, if I have not Anne Page,
I shall turn your head out of my door.
Follow my heels, Rugby.
You shall have An fool's-head of your own.
No, I know Anne's mind for that:
never a woman in Windsor
knows more of Anne's mind than I do;
nor can do more than I do with her,
I thank heaven.
(from outside) Who's within there? ho!
Who's there, I trow! Come near the house, I pray you.
How now, good woman? how dost thou?
The better that it pleases your good worship to ask.
What news? how does pretty Mistress Anne?
In truth, sir, and she is pretty,
and honest, and gentle;
and one that is your friend,
I can tell you that by the way;
I praise heaven for it.
Shall I do any good, thinkest thou?
shall I not lose my suit?
Troth, sir, all is in his hands above:
but notwithstanding, Master Fenton,
I'll be sworn on a book, she loves you.
Have not your worship a wart above your eye?
Yes, marry, have I; what of that?
Well, thereby hangs a tale:
good faith, it is such another Nan;
but, I detest, an honest maid
as ever broke bread:
we had an hour's talk of that wart.
I shall never laugh
but in that maid's company!
But indeed she is given too much
to allicholy and musing:
but for you--well, go to.
Well, I shall see her to-day.
Hold, there's money for thee;
let me have thy voice in my behalf:
if thou seest her before me, commend me.
Will I? i'faith, that we will;
and I will tell your worship
more of the wart the next time we have confidence;
and of other wooers.
Well, farewell; I am in great haste now.
Farewell to your worship.
Truly, an honest gentleman:
but Anne loves him not;
for I know Anne's mind
as well as another does.
(sniffing)
Out upon't! what have I forgot?